Close #706 improve loops (#709)
plocket/docassemble-cucumber: docs/story_tables.md

Reviewer: I'm not sure how you want these internal docs to read; I made some edits to make them a bit more straight forward, which removes so of the Question and answer style that was confusing me. Feel free to ignore if you'd prefer to keep the inquisitive / education style though.

Author: Thanks, there are a lot of good points that we'll continue to discuss. Can you pinpoint a particular reason why the Q&A format is particularly confusing. Some of it can be removed, but I think some of it could be useful - inquisitive/educational, as you described. I'm hoping to bring folks along with me in my thinking, let them know what's coming next, etc. A bit like how I'd do a live presentation.

It also seems otherwise pretty dry, though I'm not sure the Q&A format is the solution to that. If you have suggestions, I'd love to hear them.

Reviewer: > Some of it can be removed, but I think some of it could be useful - inquisitive/educational, as you described

You're right; reading back through, I like some of it; for example transitions between sections, and the examples are really useful (I am biased towards concrete examples though).  I thought that the parts I commented on didn't give enough educational content compared to their length. 

> I'm hoping to bring folks along with me in my thinking, let them know what's coming next, etc. A bit like how I'd do a live presentation.

I think that's the issue; a written document isn't like a live presentation. We can see what's coming next with a glance to the next section title. It's okay to add filler sentences in a 15 or 30 minute presentation, but the reality is that most people will only spend a short amount of time reading docs like these (unless they are stuck, when they might be frustrated, and more likely to be annoyed at sentences that don't add value or are overly long), so conciseness is still important in writing. 

I do think adding personality is good, and you don't have get rid of all of the Q&A. But there were sentences that didn't provide any information (like questions that made me think "idk, you tell me that's why I'm reading the doc"), and I'd lean towards removing those.

Author: Thanks for clarifying, I'll think more about that. No pressure, but does this change your mind about some of the suggestions you made? If so, it would help if you edit them to reflect that. Thanks for the feedback.

Reviewer: It doesn't change my mind about the parts that I edited, but I don't think that there needs to be many more edits past that.

# Story Tables overview

The Story Table is a very flexible tool. It lets the author answer interview (form) questions in any order. They can make cosmetic changes to their interview code without having to change their tests. They can edit the order of their interview's pages, move fields from one page to another, and so on.

When the robot arrives on each interview page, it finds all the fields on the page and loops through the whole Story Table trying to match rows with fields.

Here's some [documentation on the use of Story Table rows](https://suffolklitlab.org/docassemble-AssemblyLine-documentation/docs/alkiln/#story-tables).

> # Tracking use of rows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Tracking use of rows
```

Why do we track how many times each Story Table row was used to set a form's fields?

First, it lets us give the author useful information. We can show the author which rows of their story table were or weren't used. This can help the author tell that some crucial variables aren't being set as they expected. It also outputs a new Story Table for them. If they had a bunch of extra rows adding cruft, like from our [story table generator](https://plocket.github.io/al_story/), it gives the author a table with only the variables that are needed for the test.

Second, in some cases we need to actually throw an error if any row was left unused, so we have to keep track of that.

> Third, looping questions that gather multiple items in a list are tricky when the interview answers need the `.there_is_another` attribute. We can't use that attribute. Instead, we handle all gathering with `target_number` rows. What's the problem with that attribute? How do we solve it? And what's the architecture of that code?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Third, looping questions that gather multiple items in a list are tricky when the interview answers need the `.there_is_another` attribute. We can't use that attribute. Instead, we handle all gathering with `target_number` rows.
```

Author: I'm going to make some alternative suggestions that I hope still prepare the reader for the next steps of the doc. Let me know how they sit with you.

```suggestion
Third, looping questions that gather multiple items in a list are tricky when the interview answers need the `.there_is_another` attribute. We can't use that attribute. Instead, we handle all gathering with `target_number` rows. Next we'll discuss what problem the `.there_is_another` attribute creates and our approach to solving it.
```

## The loop problem

Since the Story Table loops through all its rows for each page, each row in the table needs to be unique. That is, you can only set one variable to one value. That's fine most of the time, but when gathering items in a list in a docassemble interview, there are a few ways to do it and one of them sets one variable over and over again - `.there_is_another`. This kind of loop can start with a question that sets `.there_are_any`.

For example, look for `.there_is_another` in the scenario below:

Page 1: Do you have any moms? (Set `moms.there_are_any` to `True`)
Page 2: What is your first mom's name? (Set `mom[0].name.first`)
Page 3: Do you have any other moms? (Set `moms.there_is_another` to `True`)
Page 4: What is your second mom's name? (Set `mom[1].name.first`)
Page 5: Do you have any other moms? (Set `moms.there_is_another` to `False`)

> See that on page 3, `moms.there_is_another` is set to `True` and on page 5 it's set to `False`. How can we represent that in a Story Table? Pro tip: we can't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See that on page 3, `moms.there_is_another` is set to `True` and on page 5 it's set to `False`. We can't represent this in a Story Table.
```

```
| x.there_is_another | True | moms.there_is_another |
```

The above will always say that we have another `mom`. If we allowed our users to do that, it would create an infinite loop. So we prevent our users from creating a `there_is_another`  row that has a value of `True`. We still need to allow them to set `.there_is_another`, though, so what do we do?

## The loop solution

Well, there's another way to loop to gather items in docassemble - `target_number`. For example:

Page 1: How many moms do you have? (Set `moms.target_number` to `2`)
Page 2: What is your first mom's name? (Set `mom[0].name.first`)
Page 3: What is your second mom's name? (Set `mom[1].name.first`)

The target number row looks like this:

```
| x.target_number | 2 | moms.target_number |
```

That's no problem at all for our code. It has three unique variables. How can that help us with `.there_is_another`, though?

> Good question. If we require our users to use `.target_number`[^1] we have one unique variable to tell us how many times to say "Yes" to a `.there_is_another` question. We just have to do a bit of extra work to make that happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's no problem at all for our code. It has three unique variables. If we require our users to use `.target_number`[^1] we have one unique variable to tell us how many times to say "Yes" to a `.there_is_another` question. We just have to do a bit of extra work to make that happen.
```

Author: Still have to think about this. Just noting for myself that I also want to add a small additional clarification.

```suggestion
That's no problem at all for our code. If we require our users to use `.target_number`[^1] we have one unique variable to tell us how many times to say "Yes" to a `.there_is_another` question, letting us know when to answer "No" and stop the loop. We just also have to do a bit of extra work to make that happen.
```

## The loop architecture

First, the very basic flow for setting a variable. Note: every variable that is set uses the same code that handles Story Table rows.

1. If this isn't a Story Table step, transform the given arguments into a Story Table structure - a list of row objects.
2. For each row object
  1. Create a new object with almost the same properties. It contains the original object in a property called `original` so the original can be used to print stuff for the user's report.

>   2. In this new object transform some stuff if needed. For example, substitute environment variables the author gave into actual values. They may do this to keep a value (like a password) secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. In this new object substitute environment variables the author gave into actual values. They may do this to keep a value (like a password) secret.
```
I checked, and this is the [only thing happening now](https://github.com/SuffolkLITLab/ALKiln/blob/2cb76e0bad834b3f2bc510d200b76063ede23ee2/lib/scope.js#L909-L929). I understand why you added the "some stuff", to cover if the code changes, but reading it, it really doesn't tell me anything.

  3. Add ways to accumulate the number of times the row is used.
3. For each page
  1. Identify and store all the fields on the page and all the variables they set.
  2. Shallowly clone the Story Table row list.
    1. Create a new object almost the same as the old object
    2. Print a warning to the user if they've created a `.there_is_another` row with a value of `'True'` and change that value to `'False'`.

>     3. Add artificial rows - rows we create - which is currently just used for `.target_number`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. If there is a `.target_number` row, use it to create a new row for `.there_is_another`
```

Author: It also creates `.there_are_any`. I was trying to stay fairly broad with this and get into more details later. I was worried the details would drag this part down and make it too much info. Thoughts?

Reviewer: It seems like you're trying to be both broad but also include specific details; if you want to stay broad, I wouldn't even mention `.there_is_another`, I'd just say that we add artificial rows based on existing rows. But IMO you could just add `there_are_any` to my suggestion to address your concern, and not try to talk about the concept of artificial rows at all. IMO this was a good level of concrete-ness to have.
```suggestion
    3. If there is a `.target_number` row, use it to create new rows for `.there_is_another` and `.there_are_any`
```

    4. This new list will be used to actually put answers into fields.

>   3. For each field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. For each field on the page
```

    1. Find which Story Table row, if any, matches that field.
    2. Set the field to the given value.
    3. Increment the row's accumulators.
      1. Increment all relevant `.times_used` by 1.
      2. Increment the relevant `.used_for['foo']` by 1.

>   4. Try to continue.

Reviewer: These need 4 indents to work. 

```suggestion
1. If this isn't a Story Table step, transform the given arguments into a Story Table structure - a list of row objects.
2. For each row object
    1. Create a new object with almost the same properties. It contains the original object in a property called `original` so the original can be used to print stuff for the user's report.
    2. In this new object transform some stuff if needed. For example, substitute environment variables the author gave into actual values. They may do this to keep a value (like a password) secret.
    3. Add ways to accumulate the number of times the row is used.
3. For each page
    1. Identify and store all the fields on the page and all the variables they set.
    2. Shallowly clone the Story Table row list.
        1. Create a new object almost the same as the old object
        2. Print a warning to the user if they've created a `.there_is_another` row with a value of `'True'` and change that value to `'False'`.
        3. Add artificial rows - rows we create - which is currently just used for `.target_number`.
        4. This new list will be used to actually put answers into fields.
    3. For each field
        1. Find which Story Table row, if any, matches that field.
        2. Set the field to the given value.
        3. Increment the row's accumulators.
            1. Increment all relevant `.times_used` by 1.
            2. Increment the relevant `.used_for['foo']` by 1.
    4. Try to continue.
```

  trigger: `moms.there_are_any`,
  used_for: { `x.there_are_any`: 0 }
  // `.times_used` is the same
}
```

An example of a `.there_is_another` row:

```js
{
  source: {
    // The contents of the previous outer object, with one change:  
    used_for: {
      `x.target_number`: 0,
      `x.there_are_any`: 0,
      `x.there_is_another`: 0,
    }
  }
  is_artificial: true,
  var: `x.there_is_another`,
  value: `True`,
  trigger: `moms.there_is_another`,
  used_for: { `x.there_is_another`: 0 }
  //`.times_used` is the same
}
```

Why is it all so nested? That's just how it evolved. It could probably use some refactoring.

The parts relevant to loops for gathering multiple items in a list are the `.target_number` accumulators and the artificial rows. Whenever a `.there_is_another` row is used to set an answer to a field, we add 1 to its `source.times_used`. That is, we mutate the `.target_number` object's `.times_used` property. We alsoadd 1 to its `source.used_for['x.there_is_another']` value. That mutates the `'x.there_is_another'` property of the `.used_for` of the `.target_number` object. We do the same for `.there_is_another` rows, but that doesn't matter for now.

> Why do we increment both the `.times_used` property and the `.used_for` properties? Have patience and read on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: I do think it's good to address `.times_used` when it first appears. I wanted to just highlight it in people's minds. Also, that's one of the questions I'd have if I were to see that property. Maybe that's a comment that can be added to the code as well. The below is redundant, but maybe it's better than skipping the property altogether. Thoughts?

```suggestion
It would seem like the `.times_used` property is redundant, but it has a different purpose - it lets us know whether the `target_number` row was used at all during the test to let us give appropriate feedback to the user.
```

Author: For posterity, I've moved this elsewhere.

We set the value of a `.there_are_any` row using its `source` row's `value`.  If it's greater than `0`, the value is `'True'`, otherwise it's `'False'`.

When this comes from a `.target_number` row (which I think is currently the only way we get to this stage), we set the value of a `.there_is_another` row using the `.there_is_another` accumulator in the `source` row. Three scenarios are possible.

> 

Reviewer: I had a lot of confusion reading this section. I think it's the combination of:

* referring the attributes that aren't on the example objects above (`.source.value` doesn't exist anywhere?) 
* trying to refer to a few different rows in the same sentence, without having them labeled.
* trying to be as detailed as the code itself, which makes the prose really verbose and dense with references to specific things and logic. 

I'd suggest linking to the code, and embedding a lot of these explainations (like the "why `value - 1`?" in the code comments) if you can.

Author: Good points to bring up!

> referring the attributes that aren't on the example objects above (.source.value doesn't exist anywhere?)

I reference in [a comment](https://github.com/SuffolkLITLab/ALKiln/pull/709/files/afbc42830fe0ee6f70c045d240f5b9da93a2a8ea#diff-ec6b74c585d7f697b1c6951117041474609979b71be984ce73f5082cb0cb160dR128) the fact that it still has all the old values, but it's obviously not sufficient.

> trying to refer to a few different rows in the same sentence, without having them labeled.

Would love to talk about this a bit more, maybe real time if you're ever less busy. I think maybe there's more to that confusion there. I read those and it looks to me like I do label them, so I'd like to explore what's going on there a bit more.

> * trying to be as detailed as the code itself, which makes the prose really verbose and dense with references to specific things and logic.
> 
> I'd suggest linking to the code, and embedding a lot of these explainations (like the "why value - 1?" in the code comments) if you can.

That's one of the things I was unsure of - how to hit a balance between too much detail and too little detail. I tried for a while to put all this as comments in the code, but felt that I made a hash of it and it was too hard to follow the story from one location to another. The bits of explanation didn't make sense alone. Maybe I can give it another shot, though. Maybe, if we keep this document, I can use expandable content to help with this kind of thing. For example, I might be able to put the code examples in collapsed content (using our friend `<details>`).

Reviewer: > I reference in a comment the fact that it still has all the old values

I see. Yeah, I'd just copy the contents in.

> I read those and it looks to me like I do label them, so I'd like to explore what's going on there a bit more.

I phrased that weirdly; my main point was that reading the code was easier that trying to read prose describe single lines of code.

And I really do think it comes down to that; reading the code was easier. I think a great reason to have internal docs like this is to help "following the story from one location to another", to use your words, and with some slight edits, the numbered list above does that well. But after that, when the text descends to this level of  "That mutates the `'x.there_is_another'` property of the `.used_for` of the `.target_number` object" that I just can't read the sentence and understand what's happening without also looking at the code.

Author: Do you think some of this helped follow along with what's going on with the code? That is, support reading the code? That is, is it worth keeping some of it? My concern is that the comments would be so interspersed in different sections of the code that the overall flow may be hard to follow. I'll try to reread it in context when I get back to looking at this more deeply (I think a couple of the other issues are more pressing).

Author: For posterity: I've made changes that take out the "details" section, moving some of it to the comments in the code and some of it to other places in the new docs.
